---
layout:        post
title:         "PIU Dance Pad - Steps (pads) construction"
thumbnail:     /images/posts/piu-frame-research-design/first_wood_frame.jpg
thumbnail_alt: "Acrylic pads with the arts printed on them"
date:          2020-05-15 00:00:00 +0000
author:        Rodrigo Azevedo
categories:    blog
tags:
  - DIY
  - Build
  - Arduino
  - PIU
  - DDR
  - Arcade
  - 3D Printing
  - Dance Pad
---

<p class="d-none">
  Design and construction of the acrylic pads and the LEDs that light them from beneath.
</p>

<!--more-->

<em>This is post 2/4 in a series detailing my process of building a DIY Pump it Up pad. If you don't know what this is,
check my [project summary here](/).</em>

---

Talk about wood pads, 15mm x 10mm, bracket vs bracketless, and LEDs.

Another big decision, which was later changed, was to build a the pad with brackets, as opposed to the new bracketless
pads. I'd say I chose that because of a 50/50 split between nostalgia, as that's how the pads were when I used to play
it years ago, and ignorance, as I initially thought the bracketless pads were all DIY from people who didn't care to
build bracket ones. Those brackets are there to hold the acrylic pad in place, otherwise when you step in the corner of
a pad, the other corner would lift up, potentially lifting the whole pad out of its place, ruining the song, and
potentially hurting your feet. They also need to be as thin as possible, so the only possible material for them was
steel. The brackets themselves need to be a bit bigger than their supports, so that the resulting lip can be used to
hold the pad in place. I'm not going into too many details on how I designed and built those, as they ultimately were
scraped, and I also only made and installed about 2 of them per pad, as that was the bare minimum needed to hold the
pads (wood at the time) in place. Here are some pictures of their design and build:

{% include
  image.html
  name="pad_corner_detail_project.png|wood_pad.jpg"
  description="Steel bracket and its support|Draft pad with 2 brackets installed"
%}

{% include
  image.html
  name="steel_bracket.jpg|rusty_bracket.jpg"
  description="Finished mild steel bracket|Developed a lot of rust after some use as it wasn't stainless"
%}

### Bill of Materials for the pads

These are the materials, parts and tools I used to make the frame, along with approximate costs for each. These
estimates are for the finished pad, in reality I spent a lot more on prototype stuff and parts that were eventually
scraped. The 3D printed parts, when printed with 3 perimeters and 15% infill sum up to between 1100-1200g, so 2 1kg
rolls are needed. The number of screws used in the frame alone was 43, but the total project used 179 screws in total.

<table class="table">
<thead>
  <tr>
    <th>Material</th>
    <th>Quantity</th>
    <th>Unit price</th>
    <th>Total price</th>
  </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td>Plywood sheet 1550x1500mm, 15mm thickness</td>
    <td>1</td>
    <td>€27.00</td>
    <td>€27.00</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>42x20mm treated timber, 2400mm long</td>
    <td>3</td>
    <td>€2.93</td>
    <td>€8.79</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><a href="https://www.spax.com/en/products/universal/flat-countersunk-head/universal-screw-4-x-30-mm-200-pieces-full-thread-flat-countersunk-head-cross-recess-z2-4cut-wirox-1081010400303/pid-1137/">
      Spax wood screws 4x30mm box of 200
    </a></td>
    <td>1</td>
    <td>€4.99</td>
    <td>€4.99</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><a href="https://www.amazon.co.uk/s?k=black+pla+filament">Black PLA filament 1kg</a></td>
    <td>2</td>
    <td>€20</td>
    <td>€40</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><a href="https://www.aliexpress.com/item/32851664724.html">Metal USB socket female to female</a></td>
    <td>1</td>
    <td>€2.35</td>
    <td>€2.35</td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

TODO:

- Sensors
- Electronics and Arduino